{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1561
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red5\green99\blue193;\red38\green38\blue38;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\csgenericrgb\c1961\c38824\c75686;\csgenericrgb\c14902\c14902\c14902;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-288\sl276\slmult1\sa120\qr\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Krishna Gaire ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:kg1642@nyu.edu)"}}{\fldrslt \cf2 \ul \ulc2 kg1642@nyu.edu)}}\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-288\sl276\slmult1\sa120\qc\partightenfactor0

\b\fs28 \cf0 PAP vs Frankfurt\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-288\sl480\slmult1\sa120\qj\partightenfactor0

\b0\fs24 \cf0 Free will has been and still is a fundamental problem in philosophy. Free will is the ability to choose our own actions or inactions without outside influence or interference. Intuitively, if we have free will then we should be morally responsible for all the actions we perform and if we don\'92t, we should not be morally responsible. An important role in the debate of free-will is played by a principle called Principle of Alternate Possibilities (also known as PAP). It states that \'93
\i A person is morally responsible for what he/she had done only if he/she could have done otherwise.
\i0 \'94 It means that for any person and action, the person is morally responsible for his/her actions if and only if he/she had genuine alternate possibilities available to him/her. To have alternate possibilities is to have another choice at the time that the agent/person acts. \
However, does the principle of alternate possibilities solves the problem of free will and moral responsibility? Harry Frankfurt, a famous American philosopher, does not think so. He has famously rejected the principle and argues that it is false. He argues that alternate possibilities are not required for moral responsibility. He explains his argument with his famous \'93Jones and Black\'94 example.  I will come back to Frankfurt\'92s argument in the later part for the essay. Now, I will provide Frankfurt-style counterexamples against the Principle of Alternate Possibilities. I will provide explanations after I have presented my counter-examples. \
Counter Example: The coffee machine in the office where Mr. Jones and Mr. Black work is broken. For some reason, Mr. Jones is very angry and wants to throw the coffee machine outside the window. Let\'92s assume that Mr. Jones is strong enough to pick up the coffee machine and throw it outside the window. If Mr. Jones throws the coffee machine, then he is responsible. \
Now, let\'92s assume Mr. Black also wants Mr. Jones to throw the coffee machine outside the window. Although, Mr. Black would prefer Mr. Jones to act on his own, he does not want to take chances so without Mr. Jones\'92 knowledge he implants a chip in Mr. Jones brain that will make Mr. Jones throw the coffee machine if Mr. Jones decides not to throw.  Turns out, Mr. Jones was going to throw the machine and did it on his own without having Mr. Black to use the chip to change his decision. Intuitively, Mr. Jones is responsible for his actions but at the same time he had no ability to do otherwise. Either way, only one decision would be taken. And the decision is to throw the coffee machine outside the window. \
Now, lets use the above counter-example to create an argument against PAP. I will be writing the argument in premise form:\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi360\ri-288\sl480\slmult1\sa120\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 P(1) Mr. Jones could not do otherwise (i.e not throw the coffee machine). \
P(2) Mr. Jones is responsible for his action. \
P(3) You can be responsible for your actions without having the ability to do otherwise. \
P(4) PAP is true if a person is responsible for his/her actions if and only if he/she have the ability to do otherwise. \
P(5) PAP is false if a person is responsible for his/her actions without having the ability to do otherwise.\
C : PAP is false. \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-288\sl480\slmult1\sa120\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Mr. Jones is responsible for his actions even though he had no ability to do otherwise. Therefore, PAP, in its current definition is false. These kind of counter-examples used above are called Frankfurt-style cases. In these examples, an agent is responsible for his/her actions even though he/she had no ability to do otherwise. However, some argue that these Frankfurt-style cases and arguments are faulty. In the next paragraph, I will explain one of the concerns of those who believe that Frankfurt-style cases are faulty. \
One of the objection to the Frankfurt-style cases is called \'93flicker of freedom strategy\'94. This strategy claims that there is a presence of alternate possibilities in even Frankfurt-type counterexamples. It is argued that there is a flicker of freedom and these \'93flickers of freedom\'94 fulfill the requirement of alternate possibilities. So, Mr. Jones had alternate possibilities and PAP is not wrong. \
PAP\'92s loyalists would argue that Mr. Jones had two options. First option is to throw the coffee machine outside the window on his own and second option is to be coerced by Mr. Black into throwing the coffee machine outside the window. He had the flicker of freedom to choose either the first or the second option thereby having alternate possibilities. Mr. Jones is responsible for his actions because he took the decision whether to be coerced by Mr. Black or perform the action on his own. Mr. Jones is morally responsible for his actions and he had alternate possibilities. Therefore, it is argued that Principle of Alternate Possibilities is still true. \
However, Frankfurt would not be convinced by the \'93flicker of freedom\'94 strategy. Although, Mr. Jones has the option to throw the coffee machine or be coerced by Mr. Black to throw the coffee machine, he will be performing the same action that is to throw the coffee machine outside the window. He has no alternative but to do what Mr. Black wants him to do. If he chooses to do the action on his own, his moral responsibility for doing the action is not changed by the fact that Mr. Black will make him to do it if he decides not to do it because Mr. Black intent is not exposed. Therefore, Frankfurt maintains that the Principle of Alternate Possibilities is mistaken and provides a new and improved Principle of Alternate Possibilities. According to Frankfurt Principle of Alternate Possibilities should state:\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-288\sl480\slmult1\sa120\qj\partightenfactor0

\i \cf0 	A person is not morally responsible for what he/she has done if he/she did it only because he/she could not have done otherwise. (Page 474) \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-288\sl480\slmult1\sa120\qj\partightenfactor0

\i0 \cf0 The above statement is self explanatory. According to Frankfurt a person is not morally responsible for his/her actions if he/she did it only because he/she did not have other alternatives. The person is not responsible for his/her actions if and only if the sole reason for performing certain actions is due to unavailability of alternatives. Let\'92s apply this to our Mr. Jones example. According to the revised PAP, Mr. Jones is responsible for his actions. He threw the coffee machine outside the window because it was what he really wanted to do. It was not only because he could not have done otherwise. On the other hand, if he threw the coffee machine only because there was no other option, even if throwing the coffee machine is what he wanted to do, he will not be morally responsible. \
 Understanding when do we really have the access to alternate possibilities will be crucial to understanding the issue of moral responsibility of our actions. I believe that PAP and \'91flicker of freedom strategy\'92 does not solve that problem completely. Flicker of freedom does not fulfill the requirements of alternate possibilities because the agent is not fully aware about the options. Moreover, his actions will be the same no matter what he chooses. In our case, Mr. Jones will have to throw the coffee machine no matter what he would like to do. Therefore, inserting only because in the PAP makes the PAP more robust and accounts for all known scenarios. In conclusion, I believe that Frankfurt\'92s new definition of PAP helps us better understand free will and moral responsibility. \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-288\sl480\slmult1\sa120\qj\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 \
References:\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-288\sl480\slmult1\sa120\qj\partightenfactor0

\b0 \cf3 Timpe, K. (2006). The Dialectic Role of the Flickers of Freedom [Abstract]. 
\i Philosophical Studies,
\i0  
\i 131
\i0 (2), 337-368. doi:https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007%2Fs11098-004-7482-1.pdf\
Frankfurt, H. G. (2006). Alternate possibilities and moral responsibility. 
\i Reason and Responsibility: Readings in Some Basic Problems of Philosophy,
\i0  469-475.
\fs21 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-288\sl480\slmult1\sa120\qj\partightenfactor0

\fs24 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-288\sl276\slmult1\sa120\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\
}